>> Woodruff: THE U.S. SENATE
WRANGLES OVER GUN CONTROL
LEGISLATION, JEOPARDIZING A
FINAL COMPROMISE.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE HAVE
OUR OWN DEBATE ON THE TESTLA
LEGISLATIVE STICKING POINT:
EXPANDING BACKGROUND CHECKS ON
GUN SALES.
>> Woodruff: THEN, JEFFREY BROWN
TALKS TO A FILM PRODUCER WHO
WENT "BEHIND THE LINES" OF THE
SYRIAN CONFLICT, THE TOPIC OF
TONIGHT'S "FRONTLINE."
>> EVERYDAY WAS I WITNESSING
BLOODSHED.
I WAS EITHER SEEING PEOPLE GET
KILLED OR I WAS SEEING THE
AFTERMATH OF PEOPLE BEING KILLED
OR I WAS SEEING PEOPLE BEING
BURIED.
>> Ifill: PAUL SOLMAN HAS THE
STORY OF A NEW WAY TO INVEST, AS
GOLDMAN SACHS PARTNERS WITH THE
CITY OF NEW YORK TO KEEP
TEENAGERS FROM RETURNING TO
PRISON.
>> WE BELIEVE THAT WE WILL MAKE
5% ON THIS.
AND WE'RE NOT DOING IT TO BE
CHARITABLE, WE'RE DOING IT
BECAUSE IT'S AN INVESTMENT.
>> Woodruff: AND AS FUNERAL
ARRANGEMENTS ARE SET FOR FORMER
PRIME MINISTER MARGARET
THATCHER, WE ASSESS THE DIVISIVE
POLICIES OF THE "IRON LADY."
THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON TONIGHT'S
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED STATES
SENATE MOVED CLOSER TODAY TO A
SHOWDOWN OVER GUN LEGISLATION.
AT THE SAME TIME, SUPPORTERS OF
NEW RESTRICTIONS-- FROM THE
WHITE HOUSE ON DOWN-- TRIED TO
STEP UP THE PRESSURE.
TODAY IT WAS VICE PRESIDENT JOE
BIDEN LEADING THE CHARGE FOR NEW
GUN CONTROL LAWS.
>> WE HAVE AN OBLIGATION TO TRY
WE KNOW IF WE'RE DOING THE THING
WE TALK ABOUT WE'LL ALL SAVE
LIVES.
WE'VE ALL AND SEEN THE URGENCY
OF THIS ISSUES AND YOU KNOW WHAT
WE HAVE TO DO.
>> Woodruff: HE WAS JOINED BY
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS FROM
AROUND THE COUNTRY AND FAMILY
MEMBERS OF THE SCHOOL SHOOTING
VICTIMS IN NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT,
WERE ON CAPITOL HILL APPEALING
TO LAWMAKERS.
THE GOAL: PRESSURING CONGRESS TO
ACT ON GUN LEGISLATION IN THE
FACE OF RISING OPPOSITION FROM
THE NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION.
THE FOCUS-- ESPECIALLY IN THE
SENATE-- HAS TURNED TO A
DEMOCRATIC BILL EXPANDING THE
FEDERAL BACKGROUND CHECK
REQUIREMENT TO NEARLY ALL GUN
PURCHASES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PRESSED THE
ISSUE AT A SPEECH IN CONNECTICUT
LAST NIGHT.
>> I'M ASKING EVERYONE LISTENING
TODAY, FIND OUT EREWH YOUR
MEMBER OF CONGRESS STANDS ON
THIS.
IF THEY'RE NOT PART OF THE 90%
OF AMERICANS WHO AGREE ON
BACKGROUND CHECKS THEN ASK THEM
WHY NOT.
ARE.
>> Reporter: THE CURRENT FEDERAL
SYSTEM ENACTED AS PART OF THE
BRADY ACT IN 1993 WAS FORMALLY
LAUNCHED IN 1998.
IT REQUIRES PROSPECTIVE GUN
BUYERS TO FILL OUT A SIX-PAGE
FORM FOR THE BUREAU OF ALCOHOL,
TOBACCO, FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
BEFORE THE SALE CAN BE
COMPLETED, THE GUN DEALER MUST
THEN CALL THE F.B.I. OR OTHER
DESIGNATED AGENCIES TO ENSURE
THE CUSTOMER IS ELIGIBLE TO
PURCHASE A FIREARM.
AMONG THE CRITERIA THAT WOULD
MAKE SOMEONE INELIGIBLE: HAVING
A CRIMINAL RECORD, SPECIFICALLY
FELONY CONVICTIONS OR VIOLENT
M.D.S SUCH AS DOMESTIC ABUSE.
BEING DEEMED MENTALLY ILL BY A
COURT OR INVOLUNTARILY COMMITTED
TO A MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY.
OR BEING IN THE UNITED STATES
ILLEGALLY.
BUT THE LAW APPLIES ONLY TO
FEDERALLY LICENSED DEALERS.
UNDER THE SO-CALLED GUN SHOW
LOOPHOLE, NO RECORDS ARE
REQUIRED FOR PRIVATE GUN SALES
AND IT'S A LONG-STANDING POINT
OF DEBATE AS TO JUST HOW MANY
GUNS ARE SOLD THAT WAY.
WHATEVER THE FIGURE, PROSPECTS
FOR ACTION IN THE SENATE
REMAINED UNCERTAIN.
SENATE REPUBLICAN LEADER MITCH
McCONNELL JOINED TODAY WITH 13
REPUBLICANS WHO HAVE VOWED TO
BLOCK A VOTE ON THE DEMOCRATS'
BILL UNLESS IT'S CHANGED.
>> THE PARTICULAR BILL THAT THE
MAJORITY LEADER HAS INDICATED HE
MAY CALL UP IS ONE THAT CAME OUT
OF THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE ON A
PARTISAN VOTE.
IT CLEARLY HAD NO BIPARTISAN
SUPPORT IN COMMITTEE AND THAT
WAS MY VIEW ON THAT.
>> Woodruff: ON THE OTHER HAND,
FIVEENAT SE REPUBLICANS--
INCLUDING GEORGIA'S JOHNNY
ISAACSON-- SAY THEY WANT A VOTE.
>> INSTANT BACKGROUND CHECK LAW
IN GEORGIA I WAS A PART OF IN
1995 WHEN IT PASSED.
THE ISSUE ON INSTANT BACKGROUND
CHECKS -- ON BACKGROUND CHECKS
NOW IS HOW FAR THEY GO AND
WHETHER OR NOT THEY VIOLATE
RIGHTS TO PRIVACY IN TERMS OF
MENTAL HEALTH.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, WEST
VIRGINIA DEMOCRAT JOE MANCHIN
AND PENNSYLVANIA REPUBLICAN PAT
TOOMEY ARE STILL TRYING TO WORK
OUT A COMPROMISE BILL.
DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID WENT TO THE SENATE FLOOR
WITH THE PHOTO OF A PICKET FENCE
WITH 26 SLATS IS-- ONE FOR EACH
VICTIM IN NEWTOWN AND HE
INSISTED THERE'S NO GOING BACK.
>> WE HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY TO
SAFEGUARD THESE LITTLE KIDS AND
ONCE WE DO SOMETHING MORE THAN
THE LAW TODAY, WE'VE FAILED.
>> Reporter: LATER REID ANNOUNCE
HEAD WILL TRY TO FORCE AN
INITIAL VOTE THURSDAY.
IT REMAINS UNCLEAR IF HE CAN GET
60, THE NUMBER NEEDED TO PROCEED
WE LOOK MORE CLOSELY AT THE
QUESTIONS SURROUNDING THE WAY
BACKGROUND CHECKS WORK NOW AND
WHAT EFFECT CHANGING THE LAW MAY
HAVE.
JAMES JOHNSON IS THE BALTIMORE
COUNTY POLICE CHIEF.
HE'S CHAIR OF THE NATIONAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT PARTNERSHIP TO
PREVENT GUN VIOLENCE.
HE MET WITH VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN
AT THE WHITE HOUSE TODAY.
AND LAWRENCE KEANE, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL
FOR THE NATIONAL SHOOTING SPORTS
FOUNDATION.
IT'S THE TRADE ASSOCIATION FOR
THE FIREARMS INDUSTRY.
WE WELCOME BOTH OF YOU TO THE
NEWSHOUR.
CHIEF JOHNSON, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
HOW WELL DOES THE CURRENT
BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM WORK?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY WE KNOW
ACROSS AMERICA NEARLY 40% OF ALL
GUNS THAT ARE TRANSFERRED,
NEARLY 6.6 MILLION, ARE DONE
OUTSIDE OF LICENSED FEDERAL
DEALERS.
WE KNOW WHEN A BUYER GOES TO A
LICENSED FEDERAL DEALER IT DOES
WORK.
THERE'S MANY REPUTABLE GUN SHOPS
ALL ACROSS AMERICA, NEARLY
58,000 STOP THAT STOP THESE GUNS
FROM GETTING IN THE HANDS OF BAD
PEOPLE.
NEARLY TWO MILLION GUNS WERE
STOPPED FROM BEING PURCHASED
THROUGH THAT SYSTEM.
>> Woodruff: BUT YOU'RE SAYING
IT MISSES A LOT OF GUNS.
>> NEARLY 40% AND WE HAVE CASE
AFTER CASE ALL ACROSS AMERICA
WHERE THESE GUNS WERE PURCHASED
AT GUN SHOWS AND THE PENNY SAVER
ADS AND OVER THE INTERNET WHERE
THEY GET IN THE HANDS OF PEOPLE
WHO SHOULD NOT HAVE THEM.
>> Woodruff: LAWRENCE KEANE, HOW
DO YOU SEE HOW WELL THE CURRENT
SYSTEM WORKS?
>> WELL, ACTUALLY, WE THINK THE
CURRENT SYSTEM IS BROKEN AND FAR
TOO MANY RECORDS OF PEOPLE WHO
ARE PROHIBITED BY LAW FROM BEING
ABLE TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS A
FIREARM AREN'T IN THE SYSTEM SO
WE THINK THE FOCUS SHOULD BE ON
FIXING THAT SYSTEM AND GETTING
THE RECORDS THAT AREN'T IN THERE
NOW.
THAT'S WHY THE NATIONAL SHOOTING
SPORTS FOUNDATION IS LAUNCHING A
PROGRAM TO WORK WITH THE STATES
TO BUILD COALITIONS IN THE
STATES WHERE THE RECORDS AREN'T
BEING PUT INTO THE SYSTEM.
WE THINK THAT'S WHERE THE FOCUS
SHOULD BE.
>> Woodruff: SO WHEN YOU SAY
RECORDS ARE NOT GETTING INTO THE
SYSTEM, WHAT'S FALLING DOWN?
WHAT ISN'T HAPPENING THAT SHOULD
BE HAPPENING?
>> RECORDS OF PEOPLE, FOR
EXAMPLE, ADJUDICATED AS MENTALLY
DEFECTIVE OR WERE INVOLUNTARILY
COMMITTED TO MENTAL HOSPITALS
ARE NOT BEING PUT INTO THE
SYSTEM.
FOR EXAMPLE, MASSACHUSETTS PUT
IN ONE RECORD.
RHODE ISLAND, NO RECORDS.
SO THERE WAS A STUDY DONE BY THE
GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE THAT
SHOWS HOW THE STATES -- ABOUT
HALF OF THE STATES ARE REALLY
FAILING TO GET THEIR RECORDS
INTO THE SYSTEM AND IT'S NOT
JUST MENTAL HEALTH RECORDS.
RECORDS ON RESTRAINING ORDERS,
ET CETERA, OTHER RECORDS THAT
SHOULD BE IN THE SYSTEM THAT
DOCUMENT WHO'S A PROHIBITED
PERSON.
THE DATABASE IS ONLY AS GOOD AS
THE RECORDS THAT ARE IN IT AND
IF THE RECORDS AREN'T GETTING
PUT IN BECAUSE STATES NEED TO
CHANGE PRIVACY LAWS, THAT'S WHAT
WE THINK NEEDS TO BE DONE.
WE THINK THE CONGRESS NEEDS TO
USE A CARROT-AND-STICK APPROACH
FOR FEDERAL FUNDS GOING BACK TO
THE STATES TO REQUIRE THEM TO
GET THE RECORDS INTO THE SYSTEM
OR THEY DON'T GET THE FEDERAL
GRANT FUND.
>> Woodruff: WE'RE USING THE
TERM NIX DATABASE.
THAT IS THE NAME OF THE SYSTEM.
WHAT ABOUT THAT THAT HE NEEDS
STATES TO COMPLY?
>> THAT'S BEEN GREAT IMPROVEMENT
INTO THE NATIONAL CRIMINAL
BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM.
GREAT IMPROVEMENT.
BUT WHE WE KNOW WHEN YOU LOOK AT
THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN, YOU LOOK
AT THE WORK OF MANY ELECTED
OFFICIALS WHO WORKED VERY HARD
ON THIS.
YOU LOOK AT THE VICE PRESIDENT
AND THE PRESIDENT ON THIS MATTER
WE KNOW THAT ENTERING MORE
INFORMATION AND CERTAINLY DOING
A BACKGROUND CHECK WILL SAVE
AMERICANS' LIVES.
I'M A SPORTSMAN.
I'M A SHOOTER, I'M A HUNTER.
I RELATE TO THIS GENTLEMAN THAT
I'M TALKING TO TONIGHT AND I'D
ASK HID ORGANIZATION, HIS
MEMBERSHIP, DON'T WE ALL WANT A
BACKGROUND CHECK?
THIS IS SOMETHING SIMPLE WE CAN
DO TO SAVE LIVES.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING IT'S
NOT JUST PUTTING MORE OF THE
RECORDS -- FILLING OUT THE
RECORDS THAT ARE THERE.
YOU'RE SAYING THERE NEEDS TO BE
MORE GUN SALES THAT ARE REQUIRED
TO GO THROUGH A BACKGROUND
CHECK.
>> JUST ADDING INFORMATION INTO
THE NICKS SYSTEM IS NOT GOING TO
MAKE A GREAT DIFFERENCE.
WE NEED A BACK GROUND CHECK
NATIONWIDE.
MARYLAND HAS A BACKGROUND CHECK,
FOR EXAMPLE, FOR REGULATED
FIREARM BUS IF YOU DON'T LIKE
MARYLAND'S LAWS, GO TO ANOTHER
STATE AND JUST ACQUIRE IT.
THIS IS A CASE WHERE WE NEED A
NATIONAL SYSTEM IN PLACE.
>> Woodruff: IN OTHER WORDS,
EVERYBODY WHO BUYS A GUN.
>> YES, MA'AM.
>> Woodruff: LAWRENCE KEANE?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT CORRECT THAT
YOU CAN SIMPLY GO ACROSS STATE
LINES AND BUY A GUN.
YOU CAN'T BUY A HANDGUN ACROSS
STATE LINES.
THAT'S PROHIBITED BY FEDERAL
LAW.
WE THINK THAT THE PROBLEM WE
HAVE WITH THE PROPOSALSFOR
SO-CALLED UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND
CHECKS FROM THE INDUSTRY POINT
OF VIEW IS IT PLACES THE BURDEN
ON SMALL MOM-AND-POP FEDERALLY
LICENSED FIREARMS RETAILERS AND
SMALL BUSINESSES TO PERFORM A
GOVERNMENT FUNCTION AND THEN FOR
WHICH THEY ARE REQUIRED TO IMCUR
THE COST OF KEEPING THE RECORDS.
THEY ARE THEN EXPOSED TO
POTENTIAL LICENSE REVOCATION IF
THERE'S A MISTAKE IN THOSE
RECORDS OR TO BE DRAG INTO
LIABILITY LAWSUITS, PRODUCT
LIABILITY CLAIMS AND SUCH.
WE THINK THAT TO PUT THE BURDEN
ON SMALL MOM-AND-POP BUSINESSES
TO DO THESE BACKGROUND CHECKS TO
PERFORM THE GOVERNMENT FUNCTION
IS WRONG AND WE CAN'T SUPPORT
PLACING THAT BURDEN ONLY
RETAILERS AND, IN FACT, A RECENT
SURVEY SHOWED THAT 86% OF
FEDERALLY LICENSED RETAILERS IN
THE UNITED STATES ARE OPPOSED TO
THE PROPOSALS FOR UNIVERSAL
BACKGROUND CHECKS PRECISELY
BECAUSE OF THESE REASONS.
>> Woodruff: SO HE'S SAYING THAT
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF SALES
HANDLED BY SMALLER GUN SHOPS
THAT SHOULDN'T BE REQUIRED TO
REGISTER.
>> WELL, I'D LIKE TO CORRECT
SOMETHING MR. KEANE STATED.
I RESPECTFULLY DISAGREE.
MANY PEOPLE DO ACQUIRE THEIR
GUNS OUTSIDE OF STATES THAT HAVE
STRONG REGULATIONS.
IN FACT, WE KNOW IN MARYLAND
THAT ONLY 30% OF THE GUNS USED
IN CRIMES OF VIOLENCE WERE
ACQUIRED OUTSIDE OF THE STATE
AND I COULD SHOW YOU CASE AFTER
CASE WHERE PEOPLE GO TO GUN
SHOWS AND BRING THEM BACK INTO
THE STATE.
I DON'T THINK THIS IS GOING TO
BE AN INCONVENIENCE ON GUN
SHOPS.
FRANKLY, NEARLY 92% OF ALL THESE
GUN TRANSACTION NICKS CHECKS CAN
BE DONE IN LESS THAN THREE
MINUTES AND, FRANKLY, IF I OWNED
A GUN SHOP, I'D WANT THOSE
CUSTOMERS COMING IN.
PERHAPS THEY'LL PICK UP TARGETS,
HOLSTERS OR OTHER APPARATUS FOR
SHOOTING WHILE THEY'RE THERE.
>> Woodruff: HE'S SAYING IT'S
INCONVENIENT AND WILL PUT PEOPLE
OUT OF BUSINESS.
>> I DISAGREE COMPLETELY.
I THINK THAT IS NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN.
58,000, I THINK YOU'LL SEE A
GROWTH IN THE AMOUNT OF LICENSED
FEDERAL DEALERS THAT DO THIS
WORK AND, FRANKLY, YOU DON'T TO
THINK JUST ABOUT GUN SHOPS,
THERE WILL BE OTHER INDUSTRIES
THAT WILL POP UP TO DEAL WITH
THOSE BACKGROUND CHECKS AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: LAWRENCE KEENE, DO
YOU HAVE A RESPONSE?
>> WELL, I WOULD AGREE WITH THE
CHIEF THAT THERE ARE CRIMINALS
SSE GO ACROSS LINES TO ILLEGALLY
LINES AND THOSE SAME CRIMINALS
WON'T GO THROUGH BACKGROUND
CHECKS SO THE BURDEN IS BASED ON
RETAILERS TO PERFORM A
GOVERNMENT FUNCTION FOR WHICH
THEY COULD LOSE THEIR LICENSE
AND LIVELIHOOD OR BE DRAGGED
INTO LAWSUITS.
THIS IS WHY 86% OF RETAILERS ARE
OPPOSED TO THIS.
THAT'S NOT JUST SMALL MOM AND
POPS, THAT INCLUDES LARGE
CORPORATE RETAILERS LIKE
WAL-MART AND OTHERS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THAT?
>> WHAT I'D STY THAT IS CAREER
CRIMINALS WILL STILL TRY TO
ACQUIRE THEIR GUNS ILLEGALLY BUT
LAW ABIDING CITIZENS TODAY THAT
ARE SELLING 6.6 MILLION OF THESE
GUNS WILL ABIDE BY THE LAW.
IF YOU CREATE A UNIVERSAL
BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM THAT
APPLIES ACROSS THIS GREAT NATION
IF I'M A GOOD UPSTANDING CITIZEN
I WANT A BACKGROUND CHECK.
I DON'T WANT MY GUN GETTING IN
THE HANDS OF SOMEBODY WHO IS
GOING TO USE THAT THING
ILLEGALLY.
AND, FRANKLY, GOOD LAW-ABIDING
CITIZENS WILL DEMAND A
BACKGROUND CHECK.
THEY'LL GO TO A LICENSED DEALER.
>> Woodruff: IT'S NOT CLEAR YET
MR. KEANE AND CHIEF JOHNSON WHAT
IS EMERGING IN THE FORM OF A
COMPROMISE BUT IT LOOKS AS IF
IT'S SOMETHING PERHAPS SHORT OF
A UNIVERSAL SYSTEM THAT WE KNOW
THAT SENATOR JOE MANCHIN, A
DEMOCRAT, HAS BEEN INVOLVED IN
THESE CONVERSATIONS SAID THIS
AFTERNOON THAT GUN SHOW
LOOPHOLES, INTERNET SALES
LOOPHOLES WILL BE CLOSED BUT HE
DIDN'T MAKE IT SOUND BROADER
THAN THAT FF THAT'S WHAT THEY'RE
DOING, LAWRENCE KEANE, WHAT
WOULD THE REACTION BE FROM YOUR
ORGANIZATION?
>> WELL, I'M NOT GOING TO
SPECULATE ON WHAT THE PROPOSAL
IS.
I THINK WE NEED A LEGISLATIVE
TEXT TO MAKE A DECISION.
FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS
RETAILERS, THE FOLKS THAT MY
ORGANIZATION REPRESENT ALREADY
DO BACKGROUND CHECKS AT GUN SHOW
SO FOR THE INDUSTRY WE ALREADY
DO THE BACKGROUND CHECKS AT GUN
SHOWS.
THERE'S A LOT OF MISCONCEPTION
ABOUT THE SO-CALLED GUN SHOW
LOOPHOLE.
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE HAS
DONE SURVEYS OF PRISON INMATES
INCARCERATED FOR FIREARMS
OFFENSES AND ASKED THEM WHERE
THEY OBTAIN THEIR FIREARM AND
LESS THAN 1% SAID THEY GOT THEM
AT A GUN SHOW.
SO LET'S SEE THE PROPOSAL AND
THE DETAILS AND WE'D BE HAPPY TO
TAKE A LOOK AT THE SENATOR'S
PROPOSAL.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF JOHNSON, IF
IT'S SOMETHING LESS THAN
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECK WOULD
THAT SATISFY WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING
FOR?
>> A UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECK
WILL DEFINITELY MAKE AMERICANS
SAFER.
THE NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
PARTNERSHIP TO PREVENT GUN
VIOLENCE, THE COLLECTIVE WISDOM
OF TENS OF THOUSANDS POLICE
LEADERS WERE CALLING FOR A BILL,
WERE CALLING FOR ACTION THAT
DOESN'T CREATE A MASQUERADE
NATIONAL BACKGROUND CHECK AND
CERTAINLY WE BELIEVE AND WE
STAND NEXT TO 90% OF AMERICANS,
74% OF N.R.A. MEMBERS CALLING
FOR A UNIVERSAL NATIONAL
BACKGROUND CHECK.
I WISH WE COULD ALL JUST GET IN
A ROOM AND AGREE TO ONE POINT SO
M. WANT THIS.
WHY CAN'T WE MAKE THIS HAPPEN?
>> Woodruff: YOU WANT TO RESPOND
MR. KEANE?
>> WELL, A RECENT SURVEY OF
POLICE OFFICERS INDICATE 85% OF
POLICE OFFICERS RANK-AND-FILE
POLICE OFFICERS DON'T BELIEVE
THAT THE PRESIDENT'S GUN CONTROL
PROPOSALS ARE GOING TO DO
ANYTHING TO ADVANCE SAFETY SO
THERE ISN'T EVEN DISAGREEMENT --
THERE IS EVEN DISAGREEMENT
WITHIN THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
COMMUNITY.
WE THINK THERE'S A LOT OF ROOM
FOR BUILDING COALITIONS, THE FOR
COMING TOGETHER TO MAKE OUR
COMMUNITIES SAFER.
REASONABLE MINDS CAN DISAGREE
ABOUT HOW TO ACHIEVE THAT.
WE THINK THE FOCUS SHOULD BE ON
PREVENTING UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS,
BY ENCOURAGING INDIVIDUALS WHO
OWN FIREARMS-- LIKE FIREARMS UP.
HER SAFE WAS IN HER SON'S ROOM
AND HE HAD THE COMBINATION.
SHE FELT A RESPONSIBILITY AS A
GUN OWNER TO KEEP THOSE FIREARMS
LOCKED AWAY FROM HER SON WHO SHE
KNEW TO HAVE SERIOUS MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES.
WE THINK THERE'S SADLY NOT A
SUFFICIENT DISCUSSION GOING ON
IN WASHINGTON RIGHT NOW ABOUT
ADDRESSING THE FAILURES OF THE
MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEM.
COMMONALITY OF THE LAST HORRIFIC
SHOOTINGS WE BELIEVE IS THE
MENTAL HEALTH OF THE SHOOTER.
AND WE THINK THAT'S NOT BEING
ADDRESSED AND THAT'S NOT PART OF
THIS DISCUSSION.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE ISSUES WE
WANT TO LOOK AT HERE TONIGHT.
THE FOCUS HAS BEEN ON THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS AND WE THANK
YOU BOTH VERY MUCH, LAWRENCE
KEANE AND CHIEF JIM JOHNSON.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: ONLINE YOU CAN FIND A
STATE-BY-STATEOOK  LAT EFFORTS
TO EXPAND AND RESTRICT GUN LAWS.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR,
INSIDE SYRIA'S WAR; KEEPING
TEENS OUT OF JAIL; AND
THATCHER'S CONTROVERSIAL
POLICIES.
THT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF E
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: A STUDENT
ALLEGEDLY STABBED AT LEAST 14
PEOPLE TODAY AT A TEXAS COLLEGE,
JUST OUTSIDE HOUSTON.
TWO WERE CRITICALLY WOUNDED.
POLICE SAID THE ATTACKER RAN
FROM BUILDING TO BUILDING AT
LONE STAR COMMUNITY COLLEGE.
THEY SAID LATER THEY HAVE A MALE
SUSPECT IN CUSTODY.
THERE WAS NO WORD ON WHAT KIND
OF WEAPON WAS USED, OR WHAT THE
MOTIVE WAS.
EXXONMOBIL HAS BEEN ORDERED TO
PAY $236 MILLION TO THE STATE OF
NEW HAMPSHIRE FOR CONTAMINATING
GROUNDWATER.
A STATE COURT JURY FOUND THE OIL
GIANT LIABLE TODAY FOR DAMAGE
DONE BY THE GASOLINE ADDITIVE
M.T.B.E.
AFTER A THREE-MONTH TRIAL, IT
TOOK THE JURY LESS THAN TWO
HOURS TO AGREE ON A VERDICT AND
DAMAGES.
NEW HAMPSHIRE SUED EXXONMOBIL
TEN YEARS AGO.
THE COMPANY PLANS TO APPEAL THE
VERDICT.
NORTH KOREA POUNDED OUT A NEW
NOTE TODAY IN ITS DRUM BEAT OF
WAR WARNINGS.
THIS TIME, THE MESSAGE WAS AIMED
AT FOREIGNERS IN THE SOUTH:
LEAVE WHILE YOU CAN.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM JOHN
SPARKS OF INDEPENDENT TELISIOEVN
NEWS.
>> Reporter: IN THIS FRENZIED
WAR OF WORDS THE NORTH KOREANS
TODAY DELIVERED A WARNING,
ISSUED, AS EVER, IN FEVERISH
TONES.
>> ( translated ): FOREIGNERS IN
SOUTH KOREA SHOULD SEEK SHELTER
OR EVACUATE BECAUSE THE REGION
IS ON THE BRINK OF WAR. Reporte,
THE SOUTH KOREAN CAPITAL, SEEMED
TO SHRUG OFF THE THREAT OF
THERMO NUCLEAR WAR.
THE TRAFFIC MOVED, PEDESTRIANS
SHOPPED AS NORMAL.
YET THIS TIME THE REGIME HAS
PICKED A NEW TARGET: FOREIGNN
TRAVELERS AND COMPANIES, NEW
GROUPS TO LECTURE AND UNNERVE.
>> GIVEN HOW CLOSE WE ARE TO THE
BORDER YOU JUST HAVE TO GRIN AND
BEAR IT.
YES, THERE'S A SMALL CHANCE THAT
SOMETHING DRAMATIC HAPPENS AND
IF THAT HAPPENS WE WON'T HAVE A
WHOLE LOT OF WARNING.
>> Reporter: THE SOUTH KOREAN
MILITARY IS TAKING THE THREAT
SERIOUSLY.
AN ARTILLERY UNIT FIRED LIVE
ROUNDS IN A DRILL WITH THE U.S.
TODAY AND SEOUL HAS PROMISED TO
RETALIATE FORCEFULLY IN THE
EVENT OF AN ATTACK.
THE JAPANESE AREN'T TAKING ANY
CHANCES, MOVING PATRIOT MISSILES
INTO THE CAPITAL, TOKYO.
THE FEAR: THAT THE NORTH KOREANS
ARE NOW READY TO TEST A
MEDIUM-RANGE BALLISTIC MISSILE.
JAPAN SAYS IT WILL SHOOT IT DOWN
EVEN IF IT'S PASSING OVER THE
COUNTRY INTO THE PACIFIC.
"SUCH PROVOCATIVE ACTS WON'T
HELP YOU" SAID THE COUNTRY'S
CABINET SECRETARY.
NOT EVERYONE'S ENBE PUT OFF BY
THE TROUBLE.
THE NORTH KOREANS OPENED THE
DOORS TO A GROUP OF FOREIGN
TOURISTS AND BUSINESSMEN TODAY
AND THEY SEEMED HAPPY TO MAKE
THE TRIP.
THEY'RE WELCOMING IN THE CAPITAL
AND IT SITS UNEASILY WITH THE
ADVICE GIVEN TO THE NORTH
KOREANS LAST FRIDAY.
DIPLOMATS WERE TOLD TO EVACUATE.
FROM TOMORROW THEIR SAFETY CAN
NO LONGER BE GUARANTEED, SAID
THE REGIME.
YET THE STREETS OF PYONGYANG
SEEMED PEACEFUL.
THIS IS NOT A NATION OUTWARDLY
PREPARING FOR CONFLICT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALSO TODAY, THE
TOP AMERICAN COMMANDER IN THE
PACIFIC, ADMIRAL SAMUEL
LOCKLEAR, SAID TENSIONS WITH
NORTH KOREA ARE THE WORST SINCE
THE KOREAN WAR.
BUT HE TOLD A SATE ENHEARING
THAT THE U.S. HAS THE CAPABILITY
TO INTERCEPT A NORTH KOREAN
MISSILE, IF IT NEEDS TO.
IRAN ANNOUNCED TODAY IT'S
UPGRADING TWO URANIUM SITES
RELATED TO ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
THE NEWS CAME JUST DAYS AFTER
THE LATEST NUCLEAR TALKS WITH
WORLD POWERS FELL FLAT.
PRESIDENT MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD
ORDERED THE EXPANSION OF A
URANIUM MINE AND PROCESSING
FACILITY VIA VIDEO-CONFERENCE,
AND HE SOUNDED A NEW NOTE OF
DEFIANCE.
>> ( translated ): YOU DID ALL
YOU COULD TO PREVENT IRAN FROM
GOING NUCLEAR.
WELL, NOW IRAN HAS GONE NUCLEAR.
DO YOU WANT TO TAKE IT AWAY FROM
US?
IT'S GOODTO U SE YOUR WISDOM IN
POLITICS.
YOU COULD NOT BLOCK OUR ACCESS
TO NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY WHEN WE
DIDN'T HAVE IT, HOW CAN YOU TAKE
IT FROM OUR HANDS NOW THAT WE
HAVE IT?
>> Sreenivasan: ALSO TODAY, AN
EARTHQUAKE STRUCK IN THE
VICINITY OF A NUCLEAR SITE IN
SOUTHERN IRAN.
THE QUAKE KILLED AT LEAST 32
PEOPLE AND INJURED AT LEAST 800
MORE, BUT THE GOVERNMENT SAID
THE NUCLEAR FACILITY WAS
UNDAMAGED.
TWO U.S. TROOPS HAVE DIED IN A
HELICOPTER CRASH IN AFGHANISTAN.
THE NATO AIRCRAFT WENT DOWN
TODAY IN THE EASTERN NANGARHAR
PROVINCE.
OFFICIALS SAID THERE WAS NO
ENEMY ACTIVITY IN THE AREA AT
THE TIME.
IN SOUTH SUDAN, ARMED REBELS
AMBUSHED A U.N. CONVOY TODAY,
KILLING FIVE PEACEKEEPERS FROM
INDIA AND SEVEN CIVILIANS.
IT HAPPENED IN JONGLEI STATE.
A SPOKESMAN FOR SOUTH SUDAN'S
ARMY BLAMED A MILITIA BACKED BY
THE GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN.
SOUTH SUDAN BECAME ITS OWN
COUNTRY IN 2011, SIX YEARS AFTER
ENDING A DECADES-LONG CIVIL WAR
WITH SUDAN.
A SPRING SNOWSTORM BROUGHT BACK
WINTER TO LARGE PARTS OF THE
U.S. TODAY.
WYOMING HAD A RECORD LOW OF 14
DEGREES, PLUS MORE THAN A FOOT
OF SNOW AND WINDS THAT GUSTED TO
71 MILES AN HOUR.
ELSEWHERE, SOME 500 FLIGHTS WERE
CANCELED AT DENVER INTERNATIONAL
AIRPORT, AND MANY DEPARTURES
WERE DELAYED SO PLANES COULD BE
DE-ICED.
FRZINGEE RAIN, SNOW, AND STRONG
WINDS ALSO HIT KANSAS, SOUTH
DAKOTA, AND MINNESOTA.
THE UNIVERSITY OF LOUISVILLE
BASKED IN THE GLOW TODAY OF A
NATIONAL BASKETBALL
CHAMPIONSHIP.
THE LOUISVILLE MEN BEAT MICHIGAN
LAST NIGHT IN ATLANTA, 82-76.
IT WAS THE THIRD NATIONAL TITLE
OVERALL FOR THE CARDINALS, AND
THEIR FIRST SINCE 1986.
LOUISVILLE GETS ANOTHER CHANCE
TO CELEBRATE TONIGHT, WHEN THE
WOMEN'S TEAM PLAYS CONNECTICUT
FOR THE WOMEN'S NATIONAL
CHAMPIONSHIP.
ON WALL STREET, A SURGE IN THE
PRICE OF COMMODITIES HELPED PUSH
STOCKS HIGHER.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED NEARLY 60 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 14,673.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 15 POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 3238.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN TO THE
CONFLICT IN SYRIA.
EARLIER TODAY, AL QAEDA IN IRAQ
ANNOUNCED THAT IT WILL MERGE
WITH THE SYRIAN MILITANT GROUP
AL-NUSRA FRONT.
THE AL QAEDA OFFSHOOT COULD
BECOME THE DOMINANT PLAYER IN
THE FIGHT TO TOPPLE SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL ASSAD.
THE COUNTRY'S CIVIL WAR IS THE
SUBJECT OF TONIGHT'S "FRONTLINE"
DOCUMENTARY, "SYRIA: BEHIND THE
LINES." JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE
ON THE STORY AND MAKING OF THE
FILM.
A WARNING TO VIEWERS: SOME
IMAGES ARE DISTURBING
>> Brown: IT'S A WAR, AS THIS
FILM SAYS, OF COMMUNITY AGAINST
COMMUNITY AND SOMETIMES NEIGHBOR
AGAINST NEIGHBOR.
DOCUMENTARY FILM MAKE YEAR OLLY
LAMBERT TRAVELED TO SYRIA TWICE
LAST YEAR WHERE SUNNIS LIVE ON
ONE SIDE OF THE RIVER AND
ALAWITES ON THE OTHER.
ONCE PEACEFULLY, NOW AMID
VIOLENCE.
HE WAS ABLE TO FOLLOW AND TALK
WITH PEOPLE LOYAL TO PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD AND ALSO WITH
MEMBERS OF THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY.
HERE ARE TWO TWO EXCERPTS.
THE MAIN PROTAGONIST, SYRIAN
ARMY LIEUTENANT ALI GAZI AND A
FORMER POLICEMAN WHO DEFECTED TO
THE OPPOSITION NAMED AHMED.
>> ACROSS THE RIVER OUR REGIME
-- ARE REGIME FORCES, USUALLY
OFF LIMITS TO WESTERN MEDIA.
THEIR POSITIONS DEFEND SYRIA'S
ALAWITE HEARTLAND.
THIS ARMY CHECKPOINT FACES
ACHMED'S VILLAGE AND IS ONE OF
THE LAUNCHING SITES FOR REGIME
ATTACKS.
THE PLATOON COMMANDER IS
LIEUTENANT ALI GAZI.
>> ( translated ): WE ARE THE
SYRIAN ARAB ARMY AND OUR DUTY IS
TO DEFEND THIS HOMELAND, TO
PROTECT UNARMED CIVILIANS AND TO
ATTACK MILITANTS AND DESTROY THE
ARMED MERCENARIES.
>> REBEL-HELD SUNNI VILLAGES ARE
LESS THAN A MILE AWAY.
THIS IS PRESIDENT ASSAD'S FRONT
LINE.
>> ( translated ): THERE ARE A
LOT OF ARMED GROUPS OVER THERE.
THEY'RE PARTICULARLY ACTIVE AT
NIGHT OR AT DAWN WHEN THEY'RE
PREPARING TO CARRY OUT ARMED
ATTACKS.
THERE USED TO BE A SNIPER IN THE
DOME OF THAT MOSQUE.
ONE OF MY SOLDIERS WAS SHOT IN
BY THIS SNIPER.
THEY WERE USING ARMOR-PIERCING
BULLETS BUT WE DEALT WITH THE
THREAT.
>> ( translated ): I GREW UP IN
THIS VALLEY.
I USED TO MIX WITH THE ALAWITES
A LOT.
WE WERE LIKE BROTHERS BEFORE
THIS REVOLUTION.
WE USED TO GO TO THEIR HOMES
UNTIL THE EARLY HOURS OF THE
MORNING AND THEY'D VISIT US, TOO
IF THE ALAWITES DON'T WANT TO
FIGHT US WE'LL SOLVE THIS
PROBLEM PEACEFULLY.
BUT IF THEY WANT TO CONFRONT US
THEN WE'LL RESPONSIBILITY WITH
DEADLY FORCE.
>> Reporter: THREE MILES FROM
ACHMED'S VILLAGE IN THE
SETTLEMENT OF AL BAR RAJA MALL
MAAROUF MEETS HIS COMMANDERS.
THEY'RE PLANNING THE NEXT ATTACK
AT AN ARMY BASE.
A REGIME JET HAS DROPPED A BOMB
AN AL BAR A.
IT'S LANDED THREE HUNDRED YARDS
FROM JAMAL AND HIS COMMANDERS.
THEY FEAR THEY ARE BEING
TARGETED AND FLEE TO SAFE HOUSES
D HOMES
FILLED WITH VILLAGERS AND
REFUGEES.
>> Brown: WITH ME NOW IS THE
PRODUCER OF SYRIA'S BEHIND THE
FRONT LINES OLLY LAMBERT.
TELL ME WHAT HAPPENED WHEN YOU
WERE SPENDING TIME WITH
PROTAGONISTS ON BOTH SIDESF O
THE CIVIL WAR?
>> THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF
COVERAGE ON THE REBEL SIDE OF
THE CONFLICT AND IT'S RELATIVELY
EASY TO GET INTO REBEL HELD
AREAS AROUND ALEPPO AND THE
CONFLICT IS NOW ENTERING ITS
THIRD YEAR AND WE'RE INTERESTED
IN LOOKING AT NOT JUST THE UP
CLOSE WHAT THE CONFLICT IS
LOOKING FROM BOTH SIDES BUT IT
WAS A WAY OF BEING ABLE TO SEE
THE WAY THE CONFLICT MIGHT GO IN
THE FUTURE AND THE FORCES THAT
ARE ACTING ON IT AND THE
MOTIVATIONS OF BOTH SIDES A
MIGHT GIVE SOME INDICATION OF
WHERE THINGS ARE GOING TOS
LOOKING LIKE THIS CONFLICT IS
GOING TO TAKE.
>> Brown: HOW HARD WAS IT TO
FIND THE TWO PROTAGONISTS ON
EITHER SIDE TO GAIN THEIR TRUSTS
AND CAPTURE THEIR SENSE OF THE
WAR?
>> THE HARD THING WAS GETTING TO
THAT LOCATION ONCE I WAS THERE
IT WAS RELATIVELY EASY TO --
LIKE WITH ANY DOCUMENTARY YOU
WANT TO MEET PEOPLE AS QUICKLY
AS YOU CAN AND YOU CAN EXPLAIN
IT CLEARLY AS YOU CAN ABOUT WHO
YOU ARE AND WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
AND YOU WANT THEM TO TRUST YOU
ANDLTIM UATELY WHEN PEOPLE TRUST
YOU THEN BOTH SIDES WERE VERY,
VERY KEEN TO TELL THEIR STORIES
AND GIVE THEIR PERSPECTIVE ON
WHERE THE CONFLICT WAS GOING THE
HARDEST BIT WAS GES GETTING TO T
LOCATION.
IT WAS A VERY COMPLEX PROCEDURE.
I WAS FILMING IN TWO AREAS IN
PLACES LESS THAN A MILE BETWEEN
THEM AND YET I HAD TO DO A 3,000
OR 4,000 ROUND TRIP TO GET TO
THOSE TWO PLACES.
IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE TO CROSS JUST
ONE FROM ONE PLACE TO THE OTHER.
>> Brown: WELL, THE CAMERA TAKES
US RIGHT INTO THE WAR, RIGHT
INTO THE VIOLENCE.
CAN YOU GIVE US AN ANECDOTE OR A
KEY MOMENT FOR YOU IN FILMING
THIS AND KIND OF GETTING A REAL
SENSE OF WHAT WAS GOING ON?
>> WELL, I MEAN, I'VE MADE
DOCUMENTARIES IN AREAS OF
CONFLICT FOR -- ON AND OFF FOR
ABOUT TEN YEARS NOW AND THIS WAS
FAR AND AWAY THE MOST B BITTER D
MOST VIOLENT CONFLICT ZONE I'VE
EVER BEEN TO BY A VERY LONG
MARGIN.
EVERYDAY I WAS WITNESSING DEATH
AND BLOODSHED.
I WAS EITHER SEEING PEOPLE GET
KILLED OR I WAS SEEING THE
AFTERMATH OF WHO WERE BEING
KILLED OR I WAS SEEING PEOPLE
BEING BURIED.
NOTHING REALLY RAMMED IT HOME
HOW AWFUL THIS CONFLICT HAS
BECOME THAN THE AIR STRIKES.
IT WAS A SIGNIFICANT PART OF THE
FILM.
I WAS ACTUALLY FILMING WITH A
REBEL COMMANDER CALLED JAMAL
MAAROUF, HE WAS ONE OF THE MOST
POWERFUL REBEL LEADERS IN THE
REGION THAT I WAS STAYING IN AND
WHILE I WAS FILMING HIM AS THE
CAMERA WAS RUNNING A REGIME JET
FLEW OVERHEAD AND DROPPED WHAT
S WACLEARLY A VERY LARGE BOMB ON
THE VERY VILLAGE THAT I WAS IN
AND IT LANDED JUST LESS THAN
THREE HUNDRED METERS FROM WHERE
I WAS SITTING.
THE FORCE OF IT STREAMING TO THE
GROUND AND IT KILLED 17 PEOPLE
AND THERE ARE MANY MORE INJURED
AND THERE WEREN'T ANY OTHER
JOURNALISTS -- ARAB OR WESTERN,
FOR MANY, MANY MILES.
AND TO WITNESS THE DESTRUCTION
AND THE BLOODSHED ON THAT SCALE
WAS QUITE HORRIFIC.
MORE THAN THAT, IT WAS THE
INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS ON
CIVILIANS AND THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION, MANY OF WHOM WERE
ACTUALLY REFUGEES, THE PEOPLE IN
THE VILLAGES THAT I WAS STAYING
IN, MANY OF THEM HAD FLED TO
THESE VILLAGES FROM THE CITY.
THEY THOUGHT THE VILLAGES WERE
SAFER AND THEN THEIR WORLDS ARE
LITERALLY BLOWN APART IN FRONT
OF THEM.
IT WAS A REALLY SHOCKING
EXPERIENCE.
I NEVER REALLY WITNESSED OR
EXPERIENCED ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
>> Brown: I WANT TO ASK YOU
FINALLY.
WE HEAR SO MUCH ABOUT STEAL
MATE.
THAT'S THE WORD USED IN OUR
COVERAGE HERE AND THAT'S -- I
WONDER WHAT SENSE YOU CAME AWAY
WITH WITH THE RELATIVE STATE OF
PLAY, THE STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES OF BOTH SIDES AND
THEIR DESIRE AND ABILITY TO
CARRY ON WITH THIS FIGHT, WHAT
IS YOUR SENSE OF IT?
>> IT'S A GOOD QUESTION BECAUSE
IT'S A PARADOX, REALLY.
ON THE SURFACE WHEN YOU LOOK AT
THIS CONFLICT IT SEEMS VERY
KINETIC.
VERY ENERGETIC.
THERE ARE LOTS OF THINGS
HAPPENING, MUNITIONS FALLING, A
LOT OF WEAPONRY BEING USED UP.
MANY, MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED, A
STAGGERING NUMBER OF PEOPLE ARE
GETTING KILLED YET SOMEHOW THIS
IS ALSO A STALEMATE.
ALTHOUGH BOTH SIDES ARE FIGHTING
VERY, VERY HEAVILY AND TAKING
CASUALTIES ON BOTH SIDES
EVERYDAY, WHAT WE'RE ACTUALLY
SEEING IS THE STEAL MATE BECAUSE
NEITHER SIDE CAN WIN AND NEITHER
SIDE IS ACTUALLY GOING TO LOSE
AT THE MOMENT AND THIS WILL JUST
CONTINUE LIKE A SORT OF CHURN ON
BOTH SIDES OF HUMAN LIVES.
AND THERE'S LOTS OF TALK
WHETHER WE SHOULD IN THE WEST --
WHETHER WE SHOULD OR SHOULD NOT
ARM THE REBELS AND TO MY MIND
SEEING IT UP CLOSE YOUR FIRST
INSTINCT IS ON THE REBEL SIDE
THEY ARE TAKING SUCH A PUNISHING
THAT ONES INSTINCT IS THAT WE
SHOULD BE GIVING THEM WEAPONS TO
DEFEND THEMSELVES AND YET THE
MORE YOU THINK ABOUT THAT AND
YOU PULL BACK-- AND I'M NO
MILITARY STRATEGIST-- BUT IT DID
SEEM CLEAR THAT PUMPING IN LOTS
OF WEAPONS TO TRY AND FORCE A
CHANGE, GIVING WEAPONS TO ONE
SIDE WILL PROBABLY NOT SOLVE
ANYTHING BECAUSE THE REGIME
ITSELF HAS ABSOLUTELY NO
SHORTAGE OF WEAPONS.
IT'S GETTING WEAPONS QUITE
EASILY FROM IRAN AND TRAINING
FROM IRAN AND ALSO FROM RUSSIA
SO IT WOULD MERELY UP THE ANTE
ON BOTH SIDES.
HOW TO FORCE THE REGIME AND
PRESIDENT ASSAD TO COME TO THE
NEGOTIATING TABLE, INDEED, HOW
TO MAKE THE REBELS REALLY ACCEPT
ANY KIND OF CONVERSATION WITH
HIM GIVING THE DESTRUCTION THAT
HE'S WREAKED ON HIS
THESE ARE IMPOSSIBLE QUESTIONS
AND I REALLY HAVE NO IDEA.
IT'S -- USUALLY ONE COMES OUT OF
THESE SITUATIONS, OF ANY
SITUATION AS A FILM MAKE WE ARE
SOME IDEA OF HOW THINGS MIGHT BE
CLEANED UP OR MIGHT BE RESOLVED
BUT I CAMEYD AT I
SPENT THERE I JUST FELT MORE AND
MORE BLEAK ABOUT IT.
IT'S -- I THINK THE COUNTRY, A
VERY CIVILIZED COUNTRY WITH A
GREAT DEAL OF HISTORY IS FACING
AN INCREDIBLY BLEAK FUTURE.
>> Brown: "FRONTLINE"
DOCUMENTARY "SYRIA BEHIND THE
LINES."
OLLY LAMBERT, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> A PLEASURE, THANKS FOR HAVING
ME.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN WATCH MORE
VIDEOS AND HEAR MORE SYRIAN
VOICES ON OUR HOMEPAGE, WHERE WE
HAVE A LINK TO "FROLINENT'S" WEB
SITE.
"SYRIA BEHIND THE LINES" AIRS ON
MOST PBS STATIONS LATER THIS
EVENING.
>> Woodruff: ONE WOULD BE HARD
PRESSED TO THINK OF ANY
CONNECTION LINKING RIKER'S
ISLAND, GOLDMAN SACHS, AND A
PRIVATE CHARITABLE FOUNDATION.
BUT THEY'RE ALL PART OF A NEW
WAY TO FINANCE GOVERNMENT SOCIAL
SERVICES THROUGH PRIVATE
INVESTMENT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT, PAUL SOLMAN,
LOOKED INTO THE PROJECT AS PART
OF HIS ONGOING REPORTING,
"MAKING SENSE OF FINCIALAN
NEWS."
>> Solman: NEW YORK CITY'S
INFAMOUS RIKER'S ISLAND JAIL,
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE BULK OF THE
CITY'S BILLION-DOLLAR
CORRECTIONS BUDGET.
IT'S HOME TO 88,000 INMATES A
YEAR, MANY OF THEM REGULAR
REPEAT OFFENDERS.
>> COMPLETE TURNSTILE.
>> Solman: ROCKEFELLER
FOUNDATION PRESIDENT JUDITH
RODIN HAS BEEN AS DESPAIRING AS
MOST SOCIAL REFORMERS ABOUT SO-
CALLED TURNSTILE RECIDIVISM AND
ITS COSTS, BOTH TO THE TAXPAYER
AND TO SOCIETY.
>> THESE PEOPLE DON'T GET PUT
BACK IN PRISON FOR DOING
NOTHING, SO THERE'S ALL THE
SOCIAL COST OF WHAT NEXT CRIME
THEY COMMIT DURING THIS PERIOD
AND THROUGHOUT THE REMAINING
PERIODS THAT MAKE THEM GO BK,AC
AND BACK, AND BACK NUMEROUS
TIMES.
>> Solman: BUT IN 2010, RODIN
HEARD ABOUT A NEW FINANCIAL
APPROACH TO RECIDIVISM: SOCIAL
IMPACT BONDS.
>> THIS TEAM OF INVESTMENT
BANKERS FORMED AN ORGANIZATION
IN THE U.K. CALLED SOCIAL
FINANCE AND ASKED THEMSELVES THE
QUESTION: COULD WE CREATE A BOND
JUST LIKE A TYPICAL BOND
STRUCTURE, BUT WHERE THE PAYOUT
WOULD BE BASED  A SONOCIAL
OUTCOME AND PERFORMANCE?
>> Solman: HERE'S HOW IT WORKS.
INVESTORS LEND MONEY TO A SOCIAL
SERVICE NONPROFIT WITH A
SUCCESSFUL TRACK RECORD.
THEY GET AN INTEREST-PAYING BOND
IN RETURN.
THE NON-PROFIT THEN USES THE
INVESTORS' MONEY TO EXPAND ITS
PROGRAM.
IF THE PROGRAM MEETS ITS GOALS--
SAVING THE GOVERNMENT MONEY BY,
SAY, KEEPING PEOPLE OUT OF
JAIL-- THE GOVERNMENT PAYS BACK
THE INVESTORS OUT OF THE MONEY
IT HAS SAVED.
JUDITH RODIN LOVED THE IDEA.
SO HER FOUNDATION JOINED THE
BANKERS AND INVESTED IN A SIX-
YEAR BOND TO REDUCE RECIDIVISM
>> WE BELIEVE THAT WE WILL MAKE
9% ON THIS, AND WE'RE NOT DOING
IT TO BE CHARITABLE.
WE'RE DOING IT BECAUSE IT'S AN
INVESTMENT.
>> Solman: DORA SCHRIRO RUNS NEW
YORK CITY'S HUGE CORRECTIONS
SYSTEM.
>> THIS OPPORTUNITY TO FIND A
NEW FUNDING STREAM IS
EXCEPTIONAL.
>> Solman: ONE OF HER MOST
COSTLY PROBLEMS: YOUNG REPEAT
OFFENDERS.
>> THE ADOLESCENTS, THEY MAKE UP
ABOUT 6% OF OUR POPULATION.
PERSON-TO-PERSON, THEY REPRESENT
SOME OTHE F MOST SERIOUS FELONY
CHARGES THAT WE ADMIT INTO OUR
SYSTEM IN THE COURSE OF A YEAR.
FOUR OUT OF FIVE ARE CHARGED
WITH VIOLENT FELONY CRIMES, AND
THEY'RE YOUNG.
AND ON TOP OF THAT, DESPITE THE
SEVERITY OF THE CHARGES,
RELATIVELY FEW END UP BEING
SENTENCED TO THE STATE'S
CORRECTIONAL SYSTEM.
>> Solman: THAT'S BECAUSE
TEENAGE OFFENDERS RECEIVE LESSER
SENTENCES THAN ADULTS.
>> WHICH MEANS THEY'RE BACK ON
THE STREET IN A RELATIVELY SHORT
PERIOD OF TIME.
AND HOW WELL THEY FARE AND SO
HOW WELL THE CITY FARES WHEN
THEY COME BACK INTO OUR
NEIGHBORHOODS REALLY RIDES ON
WHAT WE CAN DO WITH THEM IN THE
AMOUNT OF TIME THAT WE HAVE.
>> Solman: ENTER HIGH FINANCES'
DO-GOOD INNOVATION, THE SOCIAL
IMPACT BOND TO SUPPORT PROGRAMS
LIKE THIS ONE, TO REDUCE
RECIDIVISM.
>> THE MISTAKES THAT YOU DID TO
GET HERE, DID YOU LEARN FROM
THAT?
>> YES.
>> Solman: SO INVESTORS ARE
FUNDING HERE THE OSBORNE
ASSOCIATION, A PROVEN EXPERT IN
SUCCESSFUL COGNITIVE THERAPY,
ALSO KNOWN AS BEHAVIOR
MODIFICATION.
AND THE KEY TO THIS SCHEME IS
THAT NONPROFITS LIKE OSBORNE
HAVE DEMONSTRATED THEY CAN
ACTUALLY REDUCE RECIDIVISM.
BUT THEY HAVEN'T HAD THE FUNDING
TO TRY TO DO SO ON A LARGE
SCALE.
>> IT DOES TAKE COURAGE TO STAND
DOWN WHEN YOU HAVE THOSE
EMOTIONS TO THINK, STOP AND
THINK, AND NOT JUST ACT OUT OF
PASSION.
>> IT'S ONE-ON-ONE, COSTLY, AND
THERE'S NO LEGAL OBLIGATION.
>> THE CITY OF NEW YORK IS NOT
REQUIRED TO PROVIDE THERAPY TO
KIDS WHO ARE ON RIKER'S ISLAND.
>> Solman: BUT ALICIA GLEN, WHO
WORKED IN LEGAL AID AND NEW
YORK'S HOUSING AUTHORITY, IS NOW
A PARTNER AT GOLDMAN SACHS.
SHE SAW AN INVESTMENT
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE FIRM THAT
PROMISED A DOUBLE PAYOFF: SOCIAL
AND FINANCIAL.
>> WE ARE FUNDING $9.6 MILLION
TO A NONPROFIT.
WE ARE MAKING A LOAN TO THEM.
THE REPAYMENT OF THAT LOAN AND
OUR RETURN, OUR INTEREST, IS
ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON WHETHER OR
NOT THE ACTUAL PROGRAM WORKS.
IF THE PROGRAM DOESN'T WORK, THE
CITY IS NOT OBLIGATED TO PAY.
THAT IS A HUGE SHIFT IN THE WAY
YOU WOULD FINANCE A SOCIAL
SERVICES PROGRAM.
THAT IS REALLY GROUNDBREAKING.
>> Solman: AND THE THINKING ON
THE PART OF THE CITY IS THAT IF
IT WORKS, THEY'LL SAVE SO MUCH
MONEY THAT THEY CAN PAY YOU
BACK?
>> CORRECT.
IF 10% FEWER KIDS GO BACK TO
PRISON, WE GET OUR CAPITAL BACK,
OUR $9.6 MILLION.
BETWEEN A 10% REDUCTION AND AN
OVERALL 20% REDUCTION, WE GET
OUR CAPITAL BACK AND A RETURN.
OF $2.1 MILLION ON TOP OF OUR
PRINCIPAL.
>> SoSolman: SO AGAIN, INVESTORS
PONY UP TO EXPAND A PROVEN
PROGRAM THAT COULD SAVE THE CITY
BIG MONEY-- AN ESTIMATED $20
MILLION IF RECIDIVISM DROPS BY
20%, AND, GLEN POINTS OUT...
>> ANY SAVINGS THE CITY REALIZES
ABOVE THAT.
SO IF THERE'S A 25% REDUCTION IN
RECIDIVISM, A 30% REDUCTION IN
RECIDIVISM-- IN OTHER WORDS, IF
THE PROGRAM WE'VE FINANCED
REALLY, REALLY WORKS-- THEN WE
DO NOT CAPTURE ANY OF THAT
SAVINGS.
THAT ALL GOES BACK TO THE CITY
OF NEW YORK.
>> Solman: IF IT WORKS?
>> IF IT WORKS.
IF IT DOESN'T WORK, THEY DON'T
HAVE TO PAY SO IT REALLY IS A
WIN-WIN FOR THE TAXPAYER.
>> Solman: WIN-WIN-WIN-WIN,
ROCKEFELLER'S JUDITH RODIN
HOPES.
>> THE GOVERNMENT GETS A PROVEN
INTERVENTION.
THE SECOND WIN IS, THE SOCIAL
GANORIZATION GETS TO GO TO SCALE
BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT IS BUYING
THEIR SERVICES WHOLESALE RATHER
THAN THEM RUNNING LITTLE
BOUTIQUE PROGRAMS.
SO THAT'S THE WIN FOR THE SOCIAL
SERVICE.
WIN NUMBER THREE, GOVERNMENT IS
ALWAYS SEEKING NEW SOURCES OF
CAPITAL.
>> Solman: CAPITAL TO AUGMENT
ITS OWN MONEY?
>> CORRECT, AND MAYBE ALLOWS IT
TO DEPLOY SOME OF THE MONEY IT
WAS SPENDING THERE TOWARDS OTHER
THINGS THAT WOULD BE HARDER TO
CAPITALIZE FROM OUTSIDE.
THE FOURTH WIN IS FOR THE
INVESTOR.
INNOVATIVE FINANCE, PAUL, I
THINK, IS THE NEXT BIG STEP IN
SOLVING SOCIAL PROBLEMS.
>> Solman: BUT WAIT A SECOND.
THIS IS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE,
RIGHT?
THERE MUST BE SKEPTICS.
AND, AS IF ON CUE, HERE'S
PROFESSOR MARC ROSENMAN, AN
EXPERT ON CHARITABLE GIVING.
>>IF T HE CONCERN IS CRIMINAL
ACTIVITY AND A POSSIBLE REPEAT
OF IT, WHY NOT PREVENT ITS
EMERGENCE?
WHY NOT INVEST IN BETTER EARLY
CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND PUBLIC
SCHOOLING AND JOB TRAINING?
>> Solman: WELL, BECAUSE WE ARE
SHORTSIGHTED AND WE'RE STRAPPED,
AND GIVEN THOSE FACTS, THIS IS
BETTER THAN NOTHING.
>> IF YOU ARE PERPETUATING A
MODEL THAT IS DYSFUNCTIONAL AT
ITS CORE, I DON'T BELIEVE THAT
IT IS BETTER THAN NOTHING,
ALTHOUGH IT'S A GREAT WAY FOR A
NEW INDUSTRY TO MAKE MONEY.
THESE SOCIAL IMPACT BONDS WILL
CREATE AN INDUSTRY OF
INTERMEDIARIES AND DEAL MAKERS
AND BROKERS AND ACCOUNTANTS AND
LAWYERS.
AND THEY'LL BE MAKING A LOT OF
MONEY AND I'M SURE TAKING THAT
MONEY OFF THE TOP BEFORE IT EVER
MAKES IT TO UNDERPAID NONPROFIT
WORKERS OR THE BENEFICIARIES OF
THE PROGRAM.
>> Solman: THERE ARE OTHER
REASONS FOR SKEPTICISM AS WELL.
YES, THIS IS A RADICAL
INNOVATION.
BUT ISN'T GOLDMAN SACHS' LOAN
GUARANTEED BY THE MAYOR OF NEW
YORK, MICHAEL BLOOMBERG, THROUGH
HIS PRIVATE FOUNDATION, A LUXURY
OTHER CITIES ARE UNLIKELY TO
BOAST?
>> WELL, YES, THE BLOOMBERG
FOUNDATION IS PROVIDING A 75%
PRINCIPLE GUARANTEE OF
THAT IS PART OF OUR COLLATERAL
PACKAGE.
NEVER, REALLY, IN THE HISTORY OF
DOING PUBLIC-PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIPS TO EXPERIMENT WITH
INTERESTING FINANCIAL VEHICLES
HAVE PEOPLE NOT SOUGHT AND/OR
HAD SOME FORM OF CREDIT
ENHANCEMENT IN A TRANSACTION.
>> Solman: COLLATERAL?
>> COLLATERAL.
AT THE END OF THE DAY, IF, IN
FACT, THE INTERVENTION DOES NOT
WORK, WE CAN STILL LOSE 25% OF
OUR CAPITAL.
SO WE HAVE REAL SKIN IN THE
GAME. BUT PEOPLE IN OUR
AUDIENCE ARE GOING TO BE
WATCHING YOU AND THINKING, "I
KNOW WHY GOLDMAN SACHS IS DOING
THIS: FOR PUBLICITY."
THEY'VE BEEN TARRED AND
FEATHERED FOR YEARS NOW.
>> WELL, I'M SURE THERE ARE A
WHOLE SUBSET OF PEOPLE WHO WOULD
THINK THAT, BUT, YOU KNOW, THAT
ACTUALLY DOESN'T SQUARE WITH
WHAT THE HISTORY OF OUR BUSINESS
HAS BEEN.
WE HAVE OVER $2 BILLION OF OUR
OWN CAPITAL INVESTED IN IMPACT
INVESTING.
BUT I KNOW AS A HUMAN BEING WHO
HAS BEEN A LIFELONG NEW YORKER
THAT I CAN'T SLEEP AT NIGHT
THINKING THAT 50% OF KIDS WHO GO
TO RIKER'S, MANY OF WHOM HAVEN'T
EVEN BEEN CONVICTED, ARE WINDING
UP COMING BACK INTO JAIL BECAUSE
NOBODY IS DOING ANYTHING ABOUT
IT.
AND IF WE CAN FIGURE OUT WAYS TO
FINANCE SERVICES TO MAKE A
DIFFERENT OUTCOME FOR THOSE
KIDS, THEN THAT'S WHAT WE NEED
TO BE DOING.
>> Solman: BUT WILL THE OUTCOME
ACTUALLY BE DIFFERENT?
ON THAT QUESTION HINGES THE
FUTURE OF A BRAND-NEW AND
POTENTIALLY POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT
IN MODERN FINANCE: THE SOCIAL
IMPACT BOND.
>> Woodruff: IN HIS NEXT PIECE,
PAUL TAKES A CLOSER LOOK AT THE
PROGRAM AT RIKER'S ISLAND.
>> Ifill: AS PREPARATIONS FOR AN
APRIL 17 FUNERAL GET UNDER WAY,
THE PASSING OF MARGARET
THATCHER, BRITAIN'S FIRST FEMALE
LEADER AND THE COUNTRY'S LONGEST
SERVING PRIME MINISTER IN THE
20th CENTURY, IS ELICITING A
MIXED RESPONSE FROM THE BRITISH
PUBLIC.
ALEX THOMSON OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS REPORTS.
SPISHGS I LATE LAST NIGHT, HER
BODY WAS REMOVED FROM THE IT ARE
HOTEL IN THE CENTER OF LONDON.
READY TO BEGIN A CAREFULLY
MANAGED PROCESS.
TONY BLAIR DUBBED PRINCESS DIANA
THE PEOPLE'S PRINCESS, DAVID
CAMERON CALLED MARGARET ATCHTHER
THE PATRIOT PRIME MINISTER.
BOTH END UP WITH WHAT LOOKS AND
FEELS LIKE A STATE FUNERAL BUT
ISN'T.
>> SHE WAS A GREAT PRIME
MINISTER.
SHE WAS PRIME MINISTER FOR 11
YEARS AND WAS TOTALLY
TRANSFORMATIONAL FOR THE COUNTRY
AND I THINK THERE'S A HUGE
AMOUNT OF PEOPLE WHO WILL WANT
TO NOT JUST IN BRITAIN BUT
AROUND THE WORLD WHO WILL WANT
TO PAY THEIR RESPECTS TO HER.
>> Reporter: IN DEATH AND LIFE
THE THATCHER STORY IS TWO
STORIES OF LOVE AND HATRED, THEY
WILL BE THERE FOR THE JEWEL JIS
NEXT WEEK BUT ACROSS BRITAIN
MANY, MANY OTHER PEOPLE WILL BE
SINGING VERY DIFFERENT SONGS AND
FEELING VERY DIFFERENT EMOTIONS
SO TODAY A RUSH OF U.K. DOWN
LOADS OF "THE WIZARD OF OZ" SONG
JULIE GARLAND'S "DING-DONG THE
WITCH IS DEAD."
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH'S ONLINE
COMMENTS PAGE SHUT DOWN AFTER IT
WAS INUNDATED WITH MESSAGES OF
HATE FOR MARGARET THATCHER.
STREET PARTIES LAST NIGHT
CELEBRATING HER DEATH.
THIS WAS BRISTOL WHERE RIOT
POLICE ATTEMPTED TO BREAK UP THE
PARTY.
BELFAST, GLASGOW AND LONDON SAW
SIMILAR EVENTS.
POLICE IN LONDON SAY THEY'RE
AWARE OF A GATHERING PLAN THIS
WEEKEND.
THE PUBLIC CAN LINE THE ROUTE TO
ST. PAUL'S NEXT WEDNESDAY UNDER
A PLAN NOW BEING CODE NAMED
"OPERATION TRUE BLUE."
>> Ifill: FOR ANOTHER LOOK AT
THE CONTROVERSIAL LOOK AT THE
IRON LADY I'M JOINED BY RANA
FORHOAR AND JOHN BURNS, LONDON
BUREAU CHIEF OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
JOHN, IN THE UNITED STATES
MARGARET THATCHER IS BEING
EMBRACED AND THIS
TRANSFORMATIONAL FIGURE, KIND OF
A REAGAN ACROSS THE POND.
IS SHE BEING SEEN THE SAME WAY
THERE?
SIGNIFICANT THOUGH I THINK
MINORITY OPINION IN THIS COUNTRY
THAT JUST DISLIKED MRS
AND IN SOME QUARTERS EVEN HATED
HER BUT I THINK THE OVERWHELMING
OPINION IN THIS COUNTRY AND IN
WIDELY DISTINCT POLITICAL
QUARTERS SHE IS VIEWED AS SO
MANY HAVE SAID IN THE LAST 24
HOURS AS ONE OF THE GREATEST
PRIME MINISTERS THIS COUNTRY HAS
HAD AND POSSIBLY THE GREATEST
PEACETIME PRIME MINISTER OF THE
20th CENTURY.
>> Ifill: RAN, THAT YOU NOT ONLY
COVER ECONOMICS AND BUSINESS BUT
YOU ALSO LIVED IN GREAT BRITAIN
FOR NINE YEARS.
HOW DIVIDED IS OPINION ABOUT
HER?
>> WELL, I'VE ALWAYS SEEN
THATCHER AS A VERY DIVISIVE
CATEGORY AND I THINK HER
ECONOMIC LEGACY ROSIEST OUTSIDE
OF BRITAIN.
THE COMMENTARY, OF COURSE, WITH
HER PASSING HAS BEEN, AS JOHN
SAID, VERY POSITIVE IN MANY WAYS
BUT I THINK THAT INSIDE BRITAIN,
PARTICULARLY ON THE LEFT, SHE
WAS A VERY, VERY POLARIZING
FIGURE.
YOU KNOW, SHE DID SOME VERY
IMPORTANT THINGS TO MODERNIZE
THE COUNTRY, TO MAKE THE LABOR
MARKETS MORE FLEXIBLE, TO BETTER
PREPARE BRITAIN FOR
GLOBALIZATION BUT IT WAS A VERY,
VERY PAINFUL PROCESS.
I THINK CONSERVATIVES IN THE
U.S. HAVE PAIRED HER WITH RONALD
REAGAN ALTHOUGH I SEE THEM IN
VERY DIFFERENT LIGHTS.
I THINK IN SOME WAYS MRS. THATER
WAS MUCH BETTERS A AUSTERITY.
SHE CUT THE BUDGETS IN PUBLIC
SPENDING AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE
ECONOMY IN BRITAIN WHEREAS
SPENDING WENT UP UNDER REAGAN.
THEY WERE TAX CUTTERS BUT SHE
WAS MORE SUCCESSFUL, PERHAPSS AT
AUSTERITY.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT THAT,
JOHN, BURNS, FOR BETTER OR FOR
WORSE ON LEGACY?
>> YOU HAVE TO HAVE A BASELINE
AND THE BASELINE WOULD BE THE
MID TO LATE 1970s.
THIS COUNTRY WAS IN A TRULY
TERRIBLE STATE.
IN A STATE THAT MOST AMERICANS
OF MY AGE WOULD SIMPLY NOT
RECOGNIZE PEOPLE WOULD HAVE TO
GO BACK TO THE GREAT DEPRESSION.
INFLATION RATES WERE RUNNING AT
OVER 20%.
THERE WERE ENDLESS STRIKES.
THERE WERE THREE-DAY WORKING
WEEKS.
THE NATIONALIZED INDUSTRIES:
COAL, POWER, STEEL, THE RAILWAYS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS WERE VASTLY
OVNEFFICIENT.
THE AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY WHICH
HAD ONCE BEEN ONE OF THE GREAT
EXPORTERS AND ONE OF THE GREAT
PRIDES OF THIS COUNTRY WAS ON
ITS KNEES.
THE BIGGEST IN THE COUNTRY HAD
COME INTO PUBLIC OWNERSHIP.
THE COUNTRY WAS IN A REALLY,
TRULY, DIRE STATE AND I THINK
THE RADICALISM OF MRS. THATCHER
WHO, BY THE WAY, HAD TO DEFY
OPINION.
I'VE BEEN TRYING TO SAY THE
MAJORITY OF OPINION IN THEIR OWN
CABINET TO MAKE THE CHANGES THAT
SHE DID AND THE BRITAIN THAT I
LIVE IN TODAY IS JUST
UNRECOGNIZABLE AND I THINK IF
PEOPLE TOOK A HARD LOOK BACK
OVER THOSE 35 OR MORE YEARS THEY
WILL AGREE THAT NOBODY WOULD
WANT TO RETURN TO THAT CHAOS.
SHE PUT THE COUNTRY BACK ON A
TRAJECTORY, AN UPWARD
TRAJECTORY.
THE BRITAIN I GREW UP IN IN THE
WAKE OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR WAS
A COUNTRY WHICH WAS IN
PRECIPITOUS DECLINE WHICH HAD
ENTIRELY LOST ITS NATIONAL
SELF-CONFIDENCE AND
MRS. THATCHER PUT THAT RIGHT.
>> Ifill: RAN, THAT I'M CURIOUS,
WAS SHE EVER WRONG?
THE RIGHT OR THE WRONG HISTORY
ON THINGS LIKE SOUTH AFRICA.
>> WELL, I THINK SOME SOUTH
AFRICANS WOULD CERTAINLY SAY SHE
WAS ON THE WRONG SIDE.
YOU KNOW, AGAIN, SHE WAS A VERY
POLARIZING FIGURE AS JOHN SAID,
HER LEGACY OF THE BENCHMARK AT
THAT TIME.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I THINK
IS MOST FASCINATING RIGHT NOW IS
HER VIEW ON EUROPE.
SHE WAS VERY FORWARD MINDED IN
TERMS OF SAYING THAT EUROPE HAD
A CHOICE TO MAKE ABOUT WHETHER
IT WAS GOING TO BE DEEPER OR
BROADER IN TERMS OF HOW IT
EXPANDED OR INTEGRATED AND I
THINK THAT WAS PRESCIENT.
I THINK MRS. THATCHER ITSELF
WOULD HAVE GONE FOR BROADER AND
SHE FELT POLITICALLY THAT THE
EASTERN BLOCK COUNTRIES SHOULD
BE TAKEN INTO THE E.U.
MANY PEOPLE TODAY FEEL THAT TE U
IS TOO LARGE.
THAT THERE ARE TOO MANY
COUNTRIES WITH DIVERSE AGENDAS
AND THAT IT REALLY CAN'T BE
MAINTAINED WITH THE SIZE IT IS
NOW AND THAT THE EURO ZONE
CRISIS IS PART AND PARCEL OF
THAT.
SO IT'S INTERESTING.
HER OPINIONS ABOUT AUSTERITY,
ABOUT EUROPE, ABOUT
GLOBALIZATION ARE AS RELEVANT,
CERTAINLY, FOR DISCUSSION AS
THEY EVER WERE.
>> Ifill: WE TALK ABOUT LEGACY
AFTER THE SUBSTANCE PASSED AWAY
AND I WONDER AS WHO YOU WOULD
IDENTIFY ASTHE  HEIRS TO HER
WORLD VIEW.
NOW THAT SHE'S GONE, WHAT SHE
BELIEVED IN, DOES IT STILL
SUSTAIN?
>> IT'S INTERESTING.
I THINK THAT IN SOME WAY IT IS
HEIRS MAY BE IN THE EMERGING
MARKETS AND THE DEVELOPING WORLD
BECAUSE THOSE COUNTRIES,
COUNTRIESIKE L CHINA, BRAZIL,
INDIA, SOUTH AFRICA EVEN ARE AT
THE STAGE IN DEVELOPMENT WHERE
MANY OF HER ECONOMIC IDEAS ABOUT
PRIVATIZATION ABOUT THE PUSH
FORWARD OF MARKETS AND THE ROLL
BACK OF THE STATE ARE MORE
RELEVANT.
THE PUSH SBAK THAT THE STATE IS
BROKEN AND WE NEED MORE PUSHBACK
BUT IN CHINA AND BRAZIL THERE IS
STILL A ROLE FOR MORE OPENING,
MORE LIBERALIZATION AND
PRIVATIZATION.
SO I THINK SHE WOULD HAVE A LOT
TO SAY ABOUT WHAT WAS GOING ON
IN THOSE COUNTRIES TODAY.
>> Ifill: FINAL THOUGHT ON THAT,
JOHN BURNS?
>> I THINK RANA IS CORRECT.
THERE WAS BOUND TO BE A
CORRECTION.
THE THATCHER/REAGAN MODEL OF
FREE MARKET DEVELOPMENT
DEFINITELY, AS WE SAW OVER THE
LAST TEN YEARS BROUGHT WITH IT A
LOT OF IRRESPONSIBLE BEHAVIOR
WHICH IS NOW CAUSED THE KIND OF
CHAOS THAT WE SEE ACROSS MUCH OF
THE DEVELOPED WORLD AND
CERTAINLY MUCH OF EUROPE SO
THERE WAS A CORRECTION.
>> Ifill: JOHN BURNS OF THE "NEW
YORK TIMES," RANA FOROOHAR OF
"TIME" MAGAZINE, THANK YOU BOTH
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
SENATE DEMOCRATS MOVED TO SET UP
A SHOWDOWN OVER GUN LEGISLATION
LATER THIS WEEK, AS SUPPORTERS
STEPPED UP THE PRESSURE FOR
ACTION.
AND POLICE NEAR HOUSTON SAID A
STUDENT AT A TEXAS COMMUNITY
COLLEGE STABBED AT LEAST 14
PEOPLE BEFORE BEING SUBDUED.
TWO OF THE VICTIMS WERE
CRITICALLY WOUNDED.
>> Ifill: HOW HAS TECHNOLOGY
EMPOWERED DEMOCRACY TO FLOURISH
OUTSIDE OF MAJOR POWER
STRUCTURES LIKE GOVERNMENT?
HARI SREENIVASAN TELLS US MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: POLITICAL EDITOR
CHRISTINA BELLANTONI TALKS TO
AUTHOR NICKO MEELEE ABOUT HIS
NEW BOOK, "THE E OF NDBIG: HOW
THE INTERNET MAKES DAVID THE NEW
GOLIATH."
TEN YEARS AFTER BAGHDAD'S FALL,
WE'VE COMPILED A VIDEO SYNOPSIS
OF THE IRAQ WAR.
LOOK BACK ON THAT CONFLICT ON
OUR WORLD PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA'S
RETURN TO CHICAGO TO TACKLE
YOUTH VIOLENCE.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.